1. General Azure Security
The list of general Azure Security Technologies are below:

Azure Security Center: It is a workload protection solution; it provides security management. Additionally, advanced threat protection across the hybrid cloud. 
Azure Key Vault: It secures every sensitive detail like passwords, connection strings, and other information you need to keep your apps working.
Azure Monitor logs: A service that collects telemetry and other data and provides a query language and analytics engine to deliver operational insights for apps and resources. It can be used standalone or along with Azure Security Centre.
Azure Dev/Test Labs: A service that helps testers and developers instantly create Azure environments while minimizing waste and controlling.

2. Operations Security 
The list of Operations Security technologies are below:

Security and Audit solution: It provides a complete view of an organization’s IT security posture 
Azure Resource Manager: It enables us to work with the resources in the organization’s solution as a group. In a single coordinated operation, an organization can deploy, update, or delete all the resources. 

3. Applications Security
List of Applications Security technologies are below:

Web Application vulnerability scanning: Azure provides one-click vulnerability scanning.  
Web Application Firewall: The web application firewall (WAF) in Azure Application Gateway aims to secure web apps from rising web-based threats such as SQL injection, cross-site scripting threats, and user hijacking.
Application Insights: It is for web developers, an extendable Application Performance Management (APM) program.

4. Storage Security
Listed below are the Storage Security technologies:

Role-Based Access Control (RBAC): Restricting access based on the need to know and least privilege security principles is imperative for organizations that want to enforce security policies for data access.
Encryption: Encryption in transit is a mechanism of protecting data when it is transmitted across networks. 

5. Network Security
Listed below are the Network Security technologies:

Azure Virtual Network: An Azure virtual network (VNet) represents a client’s network in the cloud. It is a logical isolation of the Azure network fabric dedicated to your subscription. 
VPN Gateway: VPN gateway is a virtual network gateway that sends encrypted traffic across a public connection.
Network Layer Controls: Network access control is the act of controlling connectivity to and from individual devices or subnetworks, forming the center of network security.

6. Backup and Disaster Recovery
The two types of Disaster Backup Recovery are listed below:

Azure Site Recovery: It helps to orchestrate Backup, failover, and recovery of workloads and applications. Whenever the primary location goes down, they would be accessible from a secondary site.
Virtual machine backup: Azure Backup protects application data with minimal operating costs and zero capital investment.
Know about our Services in Disaster Backup Recovery here.

7. Identity and Access Management
There are two categories of Identity and access management:

Azure Active Directory: Authentication repository supports Azure’s multi-tenant, cloud-based directory, and multi-identity management services.
Azure Multi-Factor Authentication: A security provision that utilizes several authentications and verification methods before accessing protected information.
Security Checklist for Azure
Check out our Azure Security Services Checklist for better securing the data on Azure.

The Starting Checklist
Ensure that multifactor authentication is enabled for all users
Ensure that there are no guest users.
Use Role-Based Access Control to manage access to resources.
Ensure that ‘enable users to memorize multifactor authentication on devices they trust’ is disabled.
Ensure that the ‘number of processes required to reset’ is set to 2.
Make sure that ‘number of days before users are asked to re-confirm their authentication report’ is not set to 0.
Assure that ‘caution users on password resets’ is set to yes.
Ensure that ‘notify all admins when other admins reset their password?’ is set to yes.
Ensure that ‘users can comply with apps obtaining company data on their account’ is set to none.
Guarantee that ‘users can add gallery apps to their Entrance Panel’ is set to no.
Ensure that ‘users can disclose applications’ is fixed to no.
Guarantee that ‘guest users agreements are limited’ is set to yes.
Ensure that ‘members can request’ is set to no.
Guarantee that ‘guests can invite’ is set to no.
Ensure that entrance to the Azure AD administration portal should be limited.
Integrate Security Center alerts for SIEM solution.
Use the shared responsibility model to your advantage.
The Ending Checklist
Ensure that ‘users can create security associations’ is set to none.
Ensure that ‘self-service group administration enabled’ is established to no.
Make sure ‘users who can handle security groups’ is set to none.
Ensure that ‘users can create Office 365 groups’ is set to no.
Ensure that ‘users who can manage Office 365 groups’ is set to none.
Make sure ‘require multi-factor auth to join devices’ is set to yes.
Ensure that ‘secure transfer required’ is arranged to enable.
Ensure that ‘storage service encryption’ is set to enabled
On SQL servers, ensure that ‘auditing’ is set to on.
On SQL servers, ensure that ‘auditing type’ is set to a blob.
Ensure on SQL servers that ‘threat detection’ is set to on.
On SQL servers, ensure that ‘threat detection types’ is set to all.
On SQL servers, ensure that ‘send alerts to’ is set.
Ensure on SQL servers that’ email service and co-administrators’ is enabled.
On SQL servers, ensure that firewall rules are set as appropriate.
Disable RDP access on network security groups from the internet
Disable SSH access on network security groups from the internet
