The performance modeling process consists of the following steps:
1. Identify key scenarios. Identify those scenarios in which performance is
important and the ones that pose the most risk to your performance objectives.

2. Identify workloads. Identify how many users, and how many concurrent users,
your system needs to support.

3. Identify performance objectives. Define performance objectives for each of your
key scenarios. Performance objectives reflect business requirements. 

4. Identify budget. Identify your budget or constraints. This includes the maximum
execution time in which an operation must be completed and resource utilization
such as CPU, memory, disk I/O, and network I/O constraints.

5. Identify processing steps. Break your scenarios down into component
processing steps.

6. Allocate budget. Spread your budget determined in Step 4 across your
processing steps determined in Step 5 to meet the performance objectives you
defined in Step 3.

7. Evaluate. Evaluate your design against objectives and budget. You may need to
modify design or spread your response time and resource utilization budget
differently to meet your performance objectives.

8. Validate. Validate your model and estimates. This is an ongoing activity and
includes prototyping, testing, and measuring


Step 1. Identify Key Scenarios
Identify your application scenarios that are important from a performance
perspective. If you have documented use cases or user stories, use them to help you
define your scenarios. Key scenarios include the following:

Critical Scenarios
These are the scenarios that have specific performance expectations or requirements.
Examples include scenarios covered by SLAs or those that have specific performance
objectives. 

Significant Scenarios
Significant scenarios do not have specific performance objectives such as a response
time goal, but they may impact other critical scenarios.
To help identify significant scenarios, identify scenarios with the following
characteristics:
● Scenarios that run in parallel to a performance-critical scenario.
● Scenarios that are frequently executed.
● Scenarios that account for a high percentage of system use.
● Scenarios that consume significant system resources.
Do not ignore your significant scenarios. Your significant scenarios can influence
whether your critical scenarios meet their performance objectives. Also, do not forget
to consider how your system will behave if different significant or critical scenarios
are being run concurrently by different users. This “parallel integration” often drives
key decisions about your application’s units of work. For example, to keep search
response brisk, you might need to commit orders one line item at a time. 



Step 2. Identify Workload
Workload is usually derived from marketing data. It includes the following:
● Total users.
● Concurrently active users.
● Data volumes.
● Transaction volumes and transaction mix.
For performance modeling, you need to identify how this workload applies to an
individual scenario. The following are example requirements:
● You might need to support 100 concurrent users browsing.
● You might need to support 10 concurrent users placing orders. 



Step 3. Identify Performance Objectives
For each scenario identified in Step 1, write down the performance objectives.
The performance objectives are determined by your business requirements.
Performance objectives usually include the following:
● Response time. For example, the product catalog must be displayed in less than
3 seconds.
● Throughput. For example, the system must support 100 transactions per second.
● Resource utilization. A frequently overlooked aspect is how much resource your
application is consuming, in terms of CPU, memory, disk I/O, and network I/O.
Consider the following when establishing your performance objectives:
● Workload requirements.
● Service level agreements.
● Response times.
● Projected growth.
● Lifetime of your application.
For projected growth, you need to consider whether your design will meet your
needs in six months time, or one year from now. If the application has a lifetime of
only six months, are you prepared to trade some extensibility for performance? If
your application is likely to have a long lifetime, what performance are you willing
to trade for maintainability? 



Step 4. Identify Budget
Budgets are your constraints. For example, what is the longest acceptable amount of
time that an operation should take to complete, beyond which your application fails
to meet its performance objectives.
Your budget is usually specified in terms of the following:
● Execution time.
● Resource utilization.
Execution Time
Your execution time constraints determine the maximum amount of time that
particular operations can take. 

Resource Utilization
Resource utilization requirements define the threshold utilization levels for
available resources. For example, you might have a peak processor utilization limit
of 75 percent and your memory consumption must not exceed 50 MB.
Common resources to consider include the following:
● CPU.
● Memory.
● Network I/O.
● Disk I/O. 

Additional Considerations
Execution time and resource utilization are helpful in the context of your
performance objectives. However, budget has several other dimensions you may
be subject to. Other considerations for budget might include the following:
● Network. Network considerations include bandwidth.
● Hardware. Hardware considerations include items, such as servers, memory,
and CPUs.
● Resource dependencies. Resource dependency considerations include items, such
as the number of available database connections and Web service connections.
● Shared resources. Shared resource considerations include items, such as the
amount of bandwidth you have, the amount of CPU you get if you share a server
with other applications, and the amount of memory you get.
● Project resources. From a project perspective, budget is also a constraint, such as
time and cost. 

Step 5. Identify Processing Steps
Itemize your scenarios and divide them into separate processing steps, such as those
shown in Table 2.3. If you are familiar with UML, use cases and sequence diagrams
can be used as input. Similarly, Extreme Programming user stories can provide useful
input to this step.
Table 2.3: Processing Steps
Processing Steps
1. An order is submitted by client.
2. The client authentication token is validated.
3. Order input is validated.
4. Business rules validate the order.
5. The order is sent to a database server.
6. The order is processed.
7. A response is sent to the client.
An added benefit of identifying processing steps is that they help you identify
those points within your application where you should consider adding custom
instrumentation. Instrumentation helps you to provide actual costs and timings when
you begin testing your application.


Step 6. Allocate Budget
Spread your budget (determined in Step 4, “Identify Budget”) across your processing
steps (determined in Step 5, “Identify Processing Steps”) to meet your performance
objectives. You need to consider execution time and resource utilization. Some of the
budget may apply to only one processing step. Some of the budget may apply to the
scenario and some of it may apply across scenarios.
Assigning Execution Time to Steps
When assigning time to processing steps, if you do not know how much time to
assign, simply divide the total time equally between the steps. At this point, it is not
important for the values to be precise because the budget will be reassessed after
measuring actual time, but it is important to have an idea of the values. Do not insist
on perfection, but aim for a reasonable degree of confidence that you are on track. 

You do not want to get stuck, but, at the same time, you do not want to wait until
your application is built and instrumented to get real numbers. Where you do not
know execution times, you need to try spreading the time evenly, see where there
might be problems or where there is tension.
If dividing the budget shows that each step has ample time, there is no need
to examine these further. However, for the ones that look risky, conduct some
experiments (for example, with prototypes) to verify that what you will need to
do is possible, and then proceed.
Note that one or more of your steps may have a fixed time. For example, you may
make a database call that you know will not complete in less than 3 seconds. Other
times are variable. The fixed and variable costs must be less than or equal to the
allocated budget for the scenario.
Assigning Resource Utilization Requirements
When assigning resources to processing steps, consider the following:
● Know the cost of your materials. For example, what does technology x cost in
comparison to technology y.
● Know the budget allocated for hardware. This defines the total resources available
at your disposal.
● Know the hardware systems already in place.
● Know your application functionality. For example, heavy XML document
processing may require more CPU, chatty database access or Web service
communication may require more network bandwidth, or large file uploads
may require more disk I/O. 


Step 7. Evaluate
Evaluate the feasibility and effectiveness of the budget before time and effort is spent
on prototyping and testing. Review the performance objectives and consider the
following questions:
● Does the budget meet the objectives?
● Is the budget realistic? It is during the first evaluation that you identify new
experiments you should do to get more accurate budget numbers.
● Does the model identify a resource hot spot?
● Are there more efficient alternatives?
● Can the design or features be reduced or modified to meet the objectives?
● Can you improve efficiency in terms of resource consumption or time?
● Would an alternative pattern, design, or deployment topology provide a better
solution? 
● What are you trading off? Are you trading productivity, scalability,
maintainability, or security for performance?
● Consider the following actions:
● Modify your design.
● Reevaluate requirements.
● Change the way you allocate budget.


Step 8. Validate
Validate your model and estimates. Continue to create prototypes and measure the
performance of the use cases by capturing metrics. This is an ongoing activity that
includes prototyping and measuring. Continue to perform validation checks until
your performance goals are met.
The further you are in your project’s life cycle, the greater the accuracy of the
validation. Early on, validation is based on available benchmarks and prototype
code, or just proof-of-concept code. Later, you can measure the actual code as your
application develops. 

